---
title: "The Problem With Functioning Labels"
slug: "the-problem-with-functioning-labels"
id: "6949c38f-218a-462e-9a9f-ea23351da7ff"
date: "2020-10-25T13:53:00Z"
description: >
    Neurotypical people tend to use labels like "high-functioning" and
    "low-functioning" to broadly classify autistic people. Here's why I think
    these kinds of labels are ableist.
categories:
    - "language"
    - "neurodiversity"
tags:
    - "ableism"
    - "asd"
    - "autism"
    - "dsm"
    - "functioning labels"
    - "labels"
    - "spectrums"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawley@duck.com"
favorite: false
---

Autism is a disorder that most people are vaguely familiar with. Unfortunately,
there are a lot of misconceptions about autism—often perpetuated by the
media—that people have taken as granted. Among these misconceptions is the idea
that people with autism can be broadly classified as "high-functioning" or
"low-functioning." I'm going to explain why terms like these are inaccurate at
best and ableist at worst.

# What are functioning labels?

What do people mean by "high-functioning" or "low-functioning" autism?
Generally, people do understand that autism exists on a spectrum; the term
"autism spectrum" and the euphemism "on the spectrum" (referring to someone who
is autistic) exist in common parlance. However, most people think of autism as
a one-dimensional spectrum ranging from "mild" to "severe." Autistic people are
considered to be low-functioning if they fall on the "severe" end of the scale
and high-functioning if they fall on the "mild" end of the scale. This
understanding of autism isn't just a gross oversimplification, but can be
actively harmful to autistic people.

# What's Asperger's?

As a quick aside, most people have heard the term "asperger's" and understand
that it is related to autism. What is it specifically? Generally, people
consider asperger's to be synonymous with "high-functioning" autism. The term
used to be an official diagnosis in older versions of the DSM—the official
manual used by medical providers in the US to diagnose mental disorders.
Basically, it referred to a person who meets all the criteria of autism but
doesn't have significant language or intellectual impairments. Since the
release of version 5 of the DSM in 2013, asperger's and other disorders have
been removed the only official autism diagnosis is "autism spectrum disorder"
(ASD). Some autistic people who were diagnosed with asperger's still identify
with the label, and they're valid in doing so. I'll continue to use the term
"autism" to refer to both ASD and older autism diagnoses.

# What "it's a spectrum" really means

[C.L. Lynch](https://neuroclastic.com/author/cllynch/) wrote a fantastic
article, [*“Autism is a Spectrum” Doesn’t Mean What You
Think*](https://neuroclastic.com/2019/05/04/its-a-spectrum-doesnt-mean-what-you-think/),
on what autistic people really mean when they call autism a spectrum. I
encourage you to stop and read what she has to say about spectrums before
continuing.

To summarize, autism is a disorder that is characterized by difficulties in
multiple different areas of life, including pragmatic language, social
awareness, breadth of interests, information processing, sensory processing,
repetitive behaviors, and neuro-motor differences. When a person checks most or
all of these boxes, they are diagnosed with autism. However, not all autistic
people are equally impaired in all these areas. Different autistic people have
different strengths and weaknesses, which is why it's best to think of autism
as a multi-dimensional spectrum. When trying to classify an autistic person as
high-functioning or low-functioning, neurotypical people will typically fixate
on the traits that are most obvious to them, regardless of how much they
actually affect that person. In addition to being overly simplistic,
functioning labels are more a function of how neurotypical-passing an autistic
person is than how much they actually struggle integrating into society.

# Why functioning labels are harmful

Functioning labels are harmful in a number of ways, both to people labeled as
high-functioning and those labeled as low-functioning. For "high-functioning"
people, their problems often aren't taken seriously and they struggle to get
the support and accommodation they need because, much of the time, they're able
to pass as neurotypical. Some common autistic traits, such as trouble
understanding non-verbal communication and social cues, trouble assimilating
new sources of information and adapting to new situations, sensory issues, and
having a limited set of interests aren't as obvious to the casual observer.
Someone who struggles in these areas can often pass as "high-functioning"
because their challenges aren't as obvious in day-to-day interactions.
Regardless of how disabling their disorder may be, these people are often
labeled as attention-seekers and accused of drawing attention and resources
away from "lower-functioning" autistic people who are considered to need them
more.

Autistic people labeled as low-functioning are harmed by functioning labels as
well. These people typically have neuro-motor differences including trouble
with coordination and fine motor skills, obvious repetitive behaviors (stims),
and are often semi-verbal or non-verbal. The common thread between these
differences is that they are much more obvious to the casual observer, causing
people to label them as low-functioning. These people are often infantilized
and held back because people focus on their weaknesses and ignore their
strengths. While these differences can absolutely be disabling, many
"low-functioning" people are perfectly capable of living independent,
fulfilling lives with the right accommodations. Instead, they're often treated
like a basket case with no hope for a future. Semi-verbal and non-verbal people
in particular tend to be treated like infants, when many are perfectly capable
of following along with conversations and communicating via alternative
methods.

Something worth pointing out is the connection between autism and intellectual
disabilities. [According to the
CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/addm.html), approximately one-third of
autistic children in the US in 2016 also have an intellectual disability. The
correlation between these two disorders has caused people to conflate them,
when they're actually separate disorders that happen to commonly occur
together. Remember that one of the primary distinctions between autism and
asperger's in the DSM-4 was the presence of a comorbid intellectual disability.
It used to be the case that intellectual impairment was a diagnostic criteria
for autism, and people who did not meet that criteria were diagnosed with
asperger's instead. The reason why autism, asperger's, and other disorders in
the DSM-4 were consolidated into autism spectrum disorder in the DSM-5 is that
it made sense for medical providers to think of autism and intellectual
disabilities as separate; they found that providers were using the existing
diagnoses inconsistently and causing confusion.

This confusion surrounding intellectual disabilities and autism persists to
this day and is deeply embedded in how people apply functioning labels.
Typically, autistic people with an intellectual disability are considered to be
low-functioning regardless of how their autism affects them in day-to-day life,
and people considered to be low-functioning for other reasons are often assumed
to have an intellectual disability. This contributes significantly to the
problem of "low-functioning" people being infantilized.

Many non-autistic people consider the changes to autism diagnoses in the DSM-5
to be doing a disservice to autistic people. This is because the DSM-4 encoded
the low-functioning/high-functioning dichotomy in the official taxonomy of
mental disorders as separate diagnoses. To opponents of the change, this meant
lumping autistic people with a wide range of experiences into one category,
cutting them off from a more specific diagnosis that more accurately describes
their experience. While it is true that autistic people exist on a broad
spectrum, the dichotomy enforced by the old diagnoses is not helpful to
autistic people, which is why it was removed in the DSM-5. Instead of trying to
broadly categorize autistic people in harmful ways, we need to start
*listening* to autistic people and letting their own personal experiences
dictate what kind of support and accommodation is best for them.

# Why functioning labels can be ableist

In addition to the practical problems functioning labels cause for autistic
people, the obsession with classifying autistic people using functioning labels
is, in many cases, rooted in ableism. That's not to say that people who use
functioning labels never have good intentions—many parents of autistic children
cite the need for more specialized resources for their child as a rationale for
functioning labels. It's also worth noting that the use of these labels is
typically borne out of a lack of understanding of autism, and ignorance does
not equate to ableism. Still, there is often a hidden layer of implicit ableism
lying under the surface of otherwise innocent comments, and it's worth
analyzing how ableist tendencies and attitudes influence this phenomenon.

I've already mentioned how the label autistic people are given tends to be a
function of how neurotypical-passing they are, and the inherent problem here
should be recognizable to anyone with an invisible disability. Many people with
disabilities that aren't obvious to the casual observer—what we commonly refer
to as "invisible" disabilities—face discrimination from people who equate not
being able to see a disability to it not existing. A great example is people
who use wheelchairs. If someone is paralyzed from the waist down or missing a
lower limb, most people won't question them if they say they need to use a
wheelchair to get around. However, people who don't have a visible physical
disability or are able to stand or walk on their own are often not believed
when they say they need a wheelchair. These people may have chronic pain,
weakness, or issues with their nervous system that limit their ability to stand
or walk for long durations, but people tend to assume that if they can stand,
they must not be disabled. People with invisible disabilities are often denied
necessary accommodations on the premise that they're faking their disability
for sympathy or attention.

This kind of discrimination is ableism because the people who perpetuate it
think they have the right to decide whether or not a person is disabled and
whether or not they need accommodation—without knowing anything about them.
Autistic people who are labeled as high-functioning face this same kind of
discrimination; they are denied necessary accommodation because someone who
knows nothing about them decided that they aren't disabled enough.

Another aspect of the inherent ableism in functioning labels is the way they
stigmatize autistic people. Society tends to find "high-functioning" autistic
people more palatable—they're less different, less *other*. And people tend to
use the high-functioning label as a sort of reassurance: "They have autism, but
don't worry—they're *high-functioning*." It's implied that it's a *good* thing
that the person in question is high-functioning, and this in turn implies that
there's something wrong with being low-functioning. Autistic people are labeled
as low-functioning because their disability is more obvious to the casual
observer, and the term is used to imply that they're lesser people for it

I think even some autistic people who identify with the term "high-functioning"
fall into this trap. While it's important to support peoples' right to choose
how they want to be labeled—especially when they're members of a marginalized
group—I think there's often a layer of repressed ableism that causes autistic
people to be overly concerned with people knowing that they're not one of the
"low-functioning" ones. There's often a deep-seated distaste for
"low-functioning" autistic people that they've internalized after a lifetime of
social messaging from an ableist society. Many autistic people, especially
those diagnosed later in life, have had to contend with this sort of repressed
ableism, myself included.

I see these kinds of subtly ableist attitudes among parents of autistic
children as well. When asperger's was removed from the DSM in 2013, many
well-intentioned parents complained that they didn't want their
"high-functioning" children to be labeled as autistic and face the associated
stigma. Wanting to minimize the stigma your neurodivergent child is going to
face is understandable, but telling people that they should accept your
neurodivergent child because they're less disabled than someone else's isn't
helpful to autistic people and doesn't sent the right message to your child.

Not only is the false dichotomy enforced by functioning labels a wholly
inaccurate system for explaining the experiences of autistic people—it often
has nothing to do with how much an autistic person's condition affects their
life. What functioning labels really tell us is how neurotypical-passing an
autistic person is and how well they conform to arbitrary societal standards of
normalcy. While people claim their purpose is to ensure the right resources are
available to autistic people of different abilities, in practice, they're used
for othering people who don't fit in and reinforcing the heavy stigma
surrounding autism.

# What terms should I use instead?

A common question people have when we talk about how functioning labels are
harmful is, "What labels should I use instead?" Often these people are missing
the point—the problem isn't with the labels themselves, but with society's
obsession with arbitrarily classifying autistic people and enforcing a false
dichotomy.

That being said, there are situations, especially in contexts where you're
trying to provide accommodations to autistic people, where it makes sense to
classify them based on how much or what kind of support they need. The DSM-5
has a classification system for this purpose. People diagnosed with ASD are
given a "support level." This is either level 1, meaning they "require
support," level 2, meaning they "require substantial support", or level 3,
meaning they "require very substantial support". However, these terms are not a
drop-in replacement for terms like "high-functioning" and "low-functioning." If
you're asking the question of what terms you should use to classify autistic
people, you ought to ask yourself why you feel the need to classify them at
all. Is it really to help them get the accommodation they need? Even in the
case of providing accommodations, it's still typically more useful to ask them
or a caretaker what specific challenges they have and what specific
accommodations they need.

# Conclusion

It's really time we phase out functioning labels when talking about autism.
They represent a gross oversimplification of what autism is, they're not
representative of how much or what kinds of support an autistic person needs,
and they reinforce stigmas against "low-functioning" autistic people. Instead
of categorizing autistic people based on how neurotypical-passing they are, we
need to listen to them and learn what makes them different, what challenges
they have, and what they need to be successful.
