---
title: "Confessions of a Former \"SAM Aro\""
slug: "confessions-of-a-former-sam-aro"
id: "67d19737-a85f-437d-8121-91e28d9a3cbd"
date: "2021-09-16T01:03:00Z"
description: >
    I used to use the split-attraction model to conceptualize my romantic and
    orientation. Here's why I don't anymore, why the SAM never really made
    sense for me in the first place, and where I think the SAM fails a lot of
    aro folks.
categories:
    - "language"
tags:
    - "aromantic"
    - "attraction"
    - "identity"
    - "language"
    - "quoiromantic"
    - "split-attraction model"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawley@duck.com"
favorite: true
---

*This post was written for the [September 2021 Carnival of
Aros](https://arias-hollow.dreamwidth.org/15328.html), where the theme is
“Language.”*

In the aspec communities I'm originally from (mostly Reddit) and in the vast
majority of the educational material I read when first discovering aspec
identities, the "split-attraction model" (SAM) is the predominant
conceptualization scheme for explaining aspec identities, and its use is
largely uncontested. It's for this reason that I was incredibly surprised when
I first came across the ace blogosphere and discovered the many objections some
aces have towards it, including the way [it reinforces essentialism and
identity
prescriptivism](https://theacetheist.wordpress.com/2021/03/29/irony-of-the-sam-failed-critique/)
and [its anti-bi and anti-ace
origins](https://theacetheist.wordpress.com/2020/05/18/history-term-split-attraction-model/).

As an aro/ace who at one point identified with the SAM and considered
themselves a "SAM aro," I want to explain my experience with this
conceptualization scheme and why I no longer find it useful. Rather than rehash
what's already been said about why "the SAM" can be a harmful concept, my goal
is to use the SAM as an example to illustrate the problems with identity
prescriptivism and why it's so harmful to people trying to learn about
themselves and explore their identity.

For the purposes of this essay, I'm going to use the phrase "the SAM" to refer
to the conceptualization scheme which asserts that "attraction" is the sole
determinant of orientation and that attraction can be broken down into roughly
half a dozen specific types[^2]. I'm not going to try and claim that "the SAM"
is a well-defined or cohesive concept, as it actually conflates and
oversimplifies many different and more nuanced concepts, so I'm only going to
use "the SAM" to refer to what I personally understood it to mean when coming
to terms with my identity[^4].

When I first started coming to terms with my aspec identity, I found the SAM
incredibly helpful for expanding my understanding of sexuality and orientation.
Before the concept of differentiating attraction was introduced to me, I didn't
have a conceptual framework to understand my orientation because I didn't know
that things like sexuality, sensuality, and aesthetics could be decoupled from
one another. This was one of the major conceptual hurdles I had to overcome in
order to start to understand my identity.

Obviously there are other conceptualization schemes built around the concept of
differentiating attraction, like the [Greek words for
love](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_words_for_love), the
primary/secondary/tertiary attraction model, and the [triangular theory of
love](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triangular_theory_of_love), but the
ubiquity of the SAM prevented me from seeing any of these conceptualization
schemes as serious alternatives, and I instead only considered them so far as I
thought they could be mapped to the types of attraction prescribed by the SAM.
I saw the SAM as the "canonical" conceptualization scheme for aspec identities
and tried to employ tortured logic to determine whether tertiary attraction is
the same as sensual attraction or *philía* is the same as platonic attraction.

Any time I encountered a case where the SAM failed to account for someone's
experiences—of which there were obviously many—I performed feats of mental
gymnastics to rationalize the infallibility of the SAM in my mind. I was so
desperate to cling to the SAM as my Theory of Everything that I didn't just try
to use it to explain my own experiences, but to universalize about everyone.
The thought that maybe some experiences might be better explained using a
different conceptualization scheme never even occurred to me.

I was confused when I first saw some aro people claim to not use the SAM, since
nearly all of the aspec educational material I had read—including common
definitions of asexuality and aromanticism—were so deeply predicated upon it.
If being aro means not experiencing romantic attraction, how could you be aro
without a concept of romantic attraction? As a baby aro, I couldn't
conceptualize aromanticism outside the context of the SAM because aromanticism
had only ever been explained to me in terms of the SAM. In my mind, being aspec
and using the SAM were synonymous.

After initially coming out as aro, I spent considerable time questioning where
on the aromantic spectrum I fall. I agonized over the question of whether I had
ever experienced romantic attraction—specifically whether emotions I've felt
were best categorized as platonic attraction or romantic attraction. It never
occurred to me that I don't *need* to categorize my feelings this way or that
this strict romantic-platonic dichotomy might not be the best way for me to
understand my identity. I had been taught that romantic attraction is a
universally understood concept, even by those who don't experience it, so I
assumed that it must be possible for me to frame my experiences through the
lens of romantic attraction. As a result of trying to shoehorn my experiences
into the boxes prescribed by the SAM like this, I struggled to understand my
identity for a long time.

Once I accepted that the SAM doesn't fit my conceptual model of relationships,
I grew to realize that the whole concept of "attraction" and the idea that
attraction is the sole determinant of orientation doesn't make much intuitive
sense to me either. While I do distinguish between things like sexuality,
sensuality, and aesthetics, I don't necessarily think of all these things as
"types of attraction." In fact, I find the whole concept of "attraction" to be
very messy and ill-defined, and predicating my identity on it doesn't really
make much sense to me in hindsight. I used to spend a lot of time agonizing
over whether I could label certain emotions towards other people as
"attraction," because that would determine my identity. Understanding my
identity became much easier once I realized that I don't *need* to define it in
terms of the nebulous language of "attraction."

These days I understand my aromantic identity as a rejection of prescriptive
relationship norms rather than using any specific conceptualization scheme.
Rather than try to shoehorn my experiences into a strict taxonomical identity
framework, I've sort of a adopted the label "aromantic" to mean that I don't
approach relationships in a conventional way. I've found [relationship
anarchy](https://nothingradical.blog/2020/06/14/what-is-relationship-anarchy/)
to be a compelling framework for understanding my identity because it is itself
a rejection of prescriptivism in relationships. I also identify with the label
*quoiromantic* as a rejection of the concept of romantic attraction[^1],
although I tend to not use it much because of the practicality issues involved
in using esoteric identity language outside of queer communities.

While the prescriptive nature of the SAM is exactly why many aspec people take
issue with it, I also think that's why I found it so appealing for so long. As
I was trying to come to terms with my queerness and navigate my newfound sense
of identity in an amatonormative world, the structure and rigidity of the SAM
gave me comfort. Rather than have to confront and unpack a complicated mess of
emotions—a challenging prospect for an autistic person—I could simply refer to
this model to tell me how to understand my identity.

I personally don't have a problem with the collection of conceptualization
schemes people collectively refer to as "the SAM," and if a lot of people find
this collection of concepts to be a useful identity framework for them, I'm not
opposed to it having a name. My main gripe with "the SAM" is the way it's
presented as *the* conceptualization scheme for aspec folks rather than one of
many. Even among communities that acknowledge that other conceptualization
schemes exist, "the SAM" is presented as one monolithic framework that you must
either accept or reject rather than a collection of concepts you may choose
from individually[^3]. As I hope my experience shows, I think the prescriptive
nature of "the SAM" is harmful to people trying to explore their identity, as
it forces people to try and understand their identity through a framework that
may not suit their experiences. I think this phenomenon is especially worrying
considering that aspec communities were originally built around the concept of
rejecting the prescriptive identity models that don't leave room for people
like us. It shouldn't be particularly radical of me to say that people should
be free to decide their own identity and not have it decided for them.

[^1]: I identify with this label as it was originally defined by the coiner
  rather than as it has been erroneously redefined to mean not being able to
  distinguish between romantic and platonic attraction. To me, the latter
  definition implies that the romantic-platonic dichotomy is a universally
  understood concept, when I don't find it applicable in my case. If you're
  interested, Coyote wrote a timeline of the origins of this label
  [here](https://theacetheist.wordpress.com/2019/01/04/quoiro-wtfromantic-a-brief-timeline-of-disidentification-with-personal-rejection-of-romantic-orientation/).

[^2]: Under the SAM, I most often see attraction decomposed into "sexual,"
  "romantic," "sensual," and "aesthetic" types, with "platonic,"
  "queerplatonic," and "alterous" sometimes also being included.

[^3]: See [this
  post](https://asexualagenda.wordpress.com/2019/04/02/splitting-the-split-attraction-model/)
  by Siggy where he explains the problems inherent in classifying people as
  "SAM" people or "non-SAM" people.

[^4]: Some aces object to using the phrase "the SAM" unironically, which is why
  I want to clarify that I'm only speaking to my personal understanding of the
  term from the time during which I identified with it.
