---
title: "When Does a Difference Become a Disorder?"
slug: "when-does-a-difference-become-a-disorder"
id: "5608aab0-465e-49ce-8a5b-a00d9b8c5dd9"
date: "2020-06-14T18:46:00Z"
description: >
    The common messaging among neurotypical people is that a disorder is an
    abnormality, a disease. Most neurodivergent folks, however, perfer to think
    of their neurodivergence as natural variation of human developemnt. So what
    is a disorder, and what purpose do disorder labels serve if not to other
    neurodivergent folks?
categories:
    - "neurodiversity"
tags:
    - "albleism"
    - "autism"
    - "gatekeeping"
    - "disorders"
    - "mental health"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawleyskid@gmail.com"
---

A common form of hate minority communities face is people pathologizing their
differences—telling them that they have a disorder, that they're mentally ill,
that they need treatment, etc. Queer deal with this a lot; people tell them
that their sexuality or gender identity is an illness that needs to be "cured."
Far from good-faith attempts to advocate for the health of neurodivergent
people, these remarks are typically malicious in nature. The goal is to
disparage queer people by associating them with something even worse:
neurodivergent people.

When psychiatric diagnoses are slung as insults, this raises the question of
what that says about people who actually have diagnosable mental disorders.
Even people within neurodiversity communities sometimes dislike disorder labels
when used outside of a medical context because of the terrible stigma of having
a mental disorder. Generations of hate against neurodivergent people means that
even medically accurate terminology comes with a lot of baggage and loaded
meaning. Disorder labels can perpetuate stigma against people who are different
and can be used to exclude people who aren't able to pursue an official
diagnosis from neurodiversity communities. So what differentiates a disorder
from any other kind of difference? What purpose do diagnoses serve in our
culture other than to perpetuate prejudice and gatekeeping?

Of the queerphobic people who acknowledge that being queer is more than just a
lifestyle choice, many try to argue that being queer is a mental disorder. And,
in fact, homosexuality was officially classified as such in the US by the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) until 1973. Most
queer people have to deal with these sort of attacks, but asexual people are a
special case. A lot of well-meaning people who consider themselves to be LGBT
allies insist that asexuality is a mental disorder. In this case, however, it's
typically out of genuine concern rather than malice. There are a few reasons
why people think this. First, most people don't know that asexuals exist. Even
if they've wrapped their head around the idea that people can be non-straight,
they might not understand that it's possible for someone to not feel sexual
attraction. Second, a drop in libido can be indicative of an underlying medical
condition in some cases—a fact these people use to support their convictions.
Of course, plenty of asexual people do have a libido, and many of those who
don't never had one to begin with, but obviously these people don't know that.

Rather than defend acephobic people, the point of bringing this up is to
demonstrate that pathologizing others' differences doesn't just happen when
people are looking for a cheap insult. Given the way mental health is
stigmatized in the US, it isn't hard to understand why using disorders as
insults is as common as it is. It is interesting, though, that even people with
good intentions love to give armchair diagnoses. In this case, the purpose of
the "diagnosis" is to encourage the person to seek help. But help for what?
Most asexual people will tell you that they are perfectly content being
asexual, something the acephobe in this scenario rarely has a sensible answer
for. Why diagnose someone with a mental disorder if there's nothing that needs
fixing? This reveals something fundamental about how mental disorders are
viewed in American culture. People don't think of the disorder as a label for
an underlying issue; they think of the disorder as an issue in and of itself.
People aren't diagnosed with disorders because they need help; people need help
because they have a disorder.

The attitude that disorders are inherently bad has given rise to discussion
about the language surrounding disorders and disability. Some people propose we
replace the term "disabled" with "differently abled" to remove the negative
connotation and emphasize that a disability is just a difference. Others have
popularized the concept of "person-first" language which favors terms like
"person with autism" or "person who is blind" over "autistic person" or "blind
person." The idea here is that people should not be defined by their diagnoses,
but rather be considered people above all else. Person-first language actually
receives a lot of criticism from neurodiversity communities, the autism
community in particular. To autistic people, their autism is a fundamental part
of who they are, and person-first language erases that by making it something
they *have* rather than something they *are*. Additionally, the motivation
behind person-first language—the idea that people should not be defined by
their disorder—implies that it is something wrong with having a disorder, an
attitude many autistic people consider ableist.

Discussions like these are important because language is an incredibly
impactful tool for fighting ableism. The problems with these discussions is
that disabled people are often left out. Autistic people are regularly talked
over and excluded from discussions about autism, which has bred resentment
within the community. Many autistic people dislike the organization Autism
Speaks because, among other reasons, they claim to speak for autistic people
despite having few if any autistic people in leadership positions. Part of the
reason why some disabled people oppose these attempts at language reform is
that they tend to happen without their input. These are discussions primarily
led by parents, families, educators, and healthcare providers, and they're
often viewed by disabled people as a cheap grab for allyship points rather than
something that they actually asked for.

In many cases, diagnoses are used to exclude others. Some neurodivergent people
feel that self-diagnosed individuals should not be welcome in their
communities. They argue that self-diagnosed individuals don't really have the
condition they claim to—otherwise they would have been officially diagnosed—and
that this is harmful to the community as a whole because it invalidates the
hardship and oppression that "real" neurodivergent people face. A similar issue
exists in the transgender community, where some trans people—often referred to
as transmedicalists—exclude trans people who don't have an official diagnosis
of gender dysphoria and don't medically transition to an extent deemed
acceptable to the transmedicalist. They argue that these so-called
"transtrenders" harm the community by making people take the "real" trans
people less seriously.

This phenomenon of excluding people without an official diagnosis is harmful
because not everyone has the time, money, or opportunity to pursue one. It's a
long, expensive process that's out of reach for some people, and just not
necessary for others. If a person doesn't need access to resources which are
gated behind an official diagnosis, there's no reasons to pursue one other than
personal validation. Just because someone doesn't have an official diagnosis
doesn't mean they don't need a supportive community of people like them, and
even if they conclude that they aren't autistic or transgender, finding and
engaging with these communities is still a critical step in reaching that
conclusion.

While the neurodiversity community is by and large accepting of people without
an official diagnoses, disorder language and official diagnoses are still
important to the community. Often, neurodivergent people who weren't diagnosed
in childhood have to discover on their own what makes them different, and
finding a disorder label that resonates with them helps connect them to
supportive communities of people like them where they can learn more. For many
neurodivergent people, receiving an official diagnosis, especially later in
life, is an incredibly validating experience. It allows them to prove to
themselves that they're not broken—just different. Now, whether this a valid
argument for official diagnoses or indicative of a larger problem that makes
people with differences feel like they need someone else to tell them that
they're not broken is hard to pin down. When our society teaches people that
they are cisgender, heterosexual, neurotypical, etc. until proven otherwise,
people with differences go through all sorts of mental gymnastics in the
process of trying to accept themselves, and this typically involves seeking
external validation to confirm their suspicions. Any trans person who has
googled "Am I transgender?" can relate to this.

Despite how important official diagnoses are to many neurodivergent people, the
neurodiversity movement prefers to think of mental disorders as differences,
not medical conditions. This isn't so much a rejection of the concept of a
diagnosis as it is a method of distancing neurodivergent people from the
harmful stereotypes and prejudices surrounding mental disorders. Our society
treats disorders as something inherently bad that needs fixing, and it doesn't
help that organizations like Autism Speaks push the harmful rhetoric that
mental disorders are a disease and a plague upon society. Many neurodivergent
people, while they may consider themselves to be disabled because of their
differences, don't consider there to be anything wrong with them. A lot of the
prejudice neurodivergent people face is this cultural attitude that disorders
and disabilities are inherently bad, but there are other ways of thinking about
disability that don't push this harmful attitude.

The social model of disability is a popular concept in neurodiversity
communities and disability communities as a whole. The social model of
disability teaches that people aren't disabled because there's something wrong
with them, but because society isn't accommodating of their differences. Blind
people are disabled because the world was built for sighted people. People who
use wheelchairs are disabled because the world was built for people who don't
use them. This goes for neurodivergent people too. For many autistic people,
the strength of their support network is what determines how disabling their
condition is.

We still haven't addressed the core question of what differentiates a
difference from a disorder and what purpose diagnoses serve. In a medical
context, diagnoses help ensure that support and accommodation is available to
those who need it and that these resources aren't abused by those who don't.
However, diagnoses and disorder labels also serve a much broader cultural
purpose. On the one hand, they help neurodivergent people find supportive
communities and accept their differences. On the other hand, they make
neurodivergent people targets for prejudice and they're used to gatekeep people
from communities and support networks. And ultimately, when it comes to talking
about the issues surrounding the language of mental health, neurodivergent
people are left out of the discussion. It's easy to say that society needs to
unlearn generations of hate and stop viewing disorders as defects, but
practically, I think a label-focused and disorder-focused attitude toward
mental health exacerbates the problem. We don't need to abandon disorder labels
entirely, especially since they form an important part of many people's
identities and are useful in medical contexts. What we need is to adopt a
mentality closer to the social model of disability; we need to accept people as
they are and provide the accommodation they deserve. No diagnoses. No
disorders. Just people.
