---
title: "Amatonormativity and the Future I Never Really Wanted"
slug: "amatonormativity-and-the-future-i-never-really-wanted"
id: "0ca84404-755f-4ab5-ba6b-97c07d8e1ef1"
date: "2021-08-29T01:56:00Z"
description: >
    The worst damage amatonormativity inflicted on my life happened before I
    came to terms with my aro identity. Amatonormativity prescribed a future
    for me that always felt intangible, because it was never really what I
    wanted in the first place.
categories:
    - "orientation"
tags:
    - "amatonormativity"
    - "aromantic"
    - "asexual"
    - "coming out"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawley@duck.com"
favorite: false
---

*This post was written for the [August 2021 Carnival of
Aros](https://graces-of-luck.tumblr.com/post/658317862647332864/well-being-and-amatonormativity-call-for),
where the theme is “Well-being and Amatonormativity.”*

People in aspec communities talk a lot about the day-to-day challenges
amatonormativity imposes on their lives. For this month's carnival, I want to
talk a bit about how amatonormativity harmed me before I realized I'm aro and
ace, especially in regards to my mental health. I'll talk about how
amatonormativity impacted my outlook on the future, my sense of self-worth, and
my relationships growing up and during my early adulthood, as well as how
things improved once I came to terms with my identity and was able to start the
process of unlearning the lies amatonormativity made me internalize.

# The Future I Never Really Wanted

I don't think anyone ever told me growing up that I *must* have an exclusive
romantic partner—it wasn't put forth as a rule or requirement. Rather, there
was always an implicit expectation that it was something I wanted. The idea
that someone might not want this kind of partnership was never presented as a
possibility, barring there being something deeply wrong with them. This
expectation was so strong that I internalized it; I assumed that it must be
something I want, because how could I not? It would be like saying you don't
want food or water or oxygen.

A consequence of assuming that a romantic partner was something I wanted is
that I was never really able to imagine a future for myself growing up.
Amatonormativity had taught me that I would someday have an exclusive romantic
partner and all the structural commitments that come with riding the
[relationship escalator](https://offescalator.com/what-escalator/)—a house in
the suburbs, a nuclear family, and so on. So when I tried to imagine what my
future might look like, I always envisioned it through the lens of this social
script. But because I never actually wanted any of those things, this vision of
my future was always hazy at best—as if I was imagining someone *else's* life.
So while I had career aspirations as a kid, aspirations about my future
relationships and living situation always felt intangible. Society had given me
a blueprint of what I should expect my future to look like, but it felt wrong
in a way I wouldn't be able to articulate until I realized I'm aromantic.

As I got older, this inability to see a future for myself manifested as a sort
of existential dread; adulthood was creeping ever closer, but I just couldn't
picture myself actually getting there. Rather than a promise of future
prosperity I could take comfort in, the social scripts prescribed by
amatonormativity were nothing more than an inevitability that I would someday
have to resign myself to. I was never excited by the prospect of someday
meeting The One; getting married always felt like paying taxes—one of those
cryptic things that adults do because they're supposed to. Not being able to
picture myself in the life society had laid out for me was incredibly
distressing as a young adult, because nobody told me that there were
alternative paths through life.

Learning that having an exclusive romantic partner and riding the relationship
escalator isn't the only path through life was an incredibly freeing
experience. Whereas I had spent my entire life up until that point distressed
by how hazy the future seemed, suddenly the possibilities had exploded and, for
the first time in my life, I could imagine a future for myself. I didn't have
to consign myself to a nuclear family and a white picket fence—I could have the
future *I* wanted, even if I didn't know exactly what that looked like yet.

# Loving Myself as a Heartless Robot

In addition to instilling a deep fear of the future, amatonormativity made it
difficult to accept myself during the period in my life where I was most
vulnerable. As with many queer kids, sometime during my teen years, the obvious
differences between me and other kids when it came to romance and attraction
had become impossible to ignore. I had never had a romantic partner or even
felt the desire to be someone's romantic partner, and I was reaching an age
where that made me an outlier. As much as I tried to justify to myself my lack
of attraction, I felt broken. What kind of heartless, emotionless robot doesn't
feel love?

Nobody had prepared me for the possibility that I might not share in this
supposedly universal human experience, so I continued to try and convince
myself that a romantic partner was something I wanted. And my mental health
suffered for it. The cognitive dissonance between subconsciously knowing that
an exclusive romantic partner wasn't what I wanted and consciously telling
myself that it was was slowly tearing me apart. If someone had just told me
that it's okay to not want a romantic partner—if I had just been allowed to
feel like that's not a freakish thing—my mental health would have been much
improved.

Once I learned about aromanticism, everything clicked into place. Knowing that
there are other people out there just like me—happy, successful people who also
don't experience romantic attraction—was incredibly reassuring. Letting go of
the self-hatred that I have felt for most of my life has been a tough journey,
but this was an important step on the path towards loving and accepting myself.

# Breaking Down Emotional Barriers

Amatonormativity also hurt me by making it difficult for me to open myself up
emotionally. Before coming to terms with my aromanticism, I tended to keep
friends at an arms length because I was always paralyzed by the fear that they
might become romantically attracted to me, or worse, that they might think I'm
romantically attracted to them. The customs and conventions surrounding
courtship rituals have always eluded me, and so a persistent fear of giving
people the wrong idea prevented me from forming close emotional bonds. A
consequence of this is that I had to go through some of the worst years of my
life without a support system of close friends who I could turn to.

In addition to being closed off emotionally, until I came to terms with my
aromanticism and asexuality, I was closed off to intimacy and affection.
Because of amatonormativity, I had always associated intimacy and affection
with romance and sex. Because I was programmed to believe that these things
can't be separated, or shared in a platonic context, I never imagined that
intimacy and affection were something I could have. And as a consequence, I
built emotional walls around myself to protect myself, not realizing how much
damage I was actually doing.

When I explain to people what it means to be aromantic and asexual, they always
seem concerned that I'm going to live a miserable, lonely life devoid of
emotional connection. Living authentically and being out as aro/ace has
actually helped me to build genuine emotional connections for the first time in
my life. I was a lonely kid growing up, but now I have the intimate and
affectionate platonic connections I never thought I could have. Contrary to
what most allo people expect, I'm far less lonely now than I was before I came
to terms with my identity.

# Conclusion

While amatonormativity still impacts me today—as it does all aro people—I think
the worst damage it inflicted on my life happened before I came to terms with
my identity, when I didn't yet understand how harmful a lot of the social
programming I had grown up with really is. I think understanding
amatonormativity gives it significantly less power over me; I can recognize now
that just because an idea is conventional and widely accepted doesn't mean it's
true.

Being neurodivergent, I struggled a lot with mental health issues growing up.
While it wasn't the only contributing factor to my mental health,
amatonormativity exacerbated those issues in ways I wouldn't understand until
much later. I think it's important to talk about the intersection of
amatonormativity and mental health, because while amatonormativity is obviously
detrimental to aspec people like me, I also believe it's is harmful to
everyone, in much the same way systems like toxic masculinity and  the
patriarchy don't just harm gender minorities. Hopefully someday discussions
about amatonormativity aren't just relegated to aspec circles and can be
discussed more broadly.
