---
title: "A Case for Representation"
slug: "a-case-for-representation"
id: "6745ab5c-dd48-11ec-b7a6-17be73a06b78"
date: "2020-06-10T18:40:00Z"
description: >
    Most people understand on some surface level that representation is good,
    but most people who aren't part of a marginalized group don't fully
    understand why. It's a hard concept to grok if you haven't experienced the
    complete absense of representation of people like you.
categories:
    - "advocacy"
tags:
    - "equality"
    - "marginalization"
    - "media"
    - "representation"
    - "visibility"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawleyskid@gmail.com"
---

Marginalized groups have long campaigned for more equal representation in the
media; they want to see more people like them in books, movies, shows, games,
and other forms of entertainment. Many people outside those groups, however,
don't understand why they make such a big deal of it or why current efforts to
improve representation are not enough for them. Content creators argue that
they need to appeal to the largest market segments, that having too many
minority characters in a story is unrealistic, that representing certain groups
could be controversial, and that diversity just isn't as important as some
people make it out to be.

For people who are underrepresented or hardly represented at all in the media,
representation is crucial. Content creators often don't realize how much harm
they're doing by failing to represent certain groups. Here are some reasons why
representation is so important to the people who don't have it.

# People need heroes who are like them

Heroes are people we aspire to be; we choose our heroes because they embody the
qualities we want to see in ourselves. When someone has a hero that looks like
them, acts like them or comes from a similar background, it’s an empowering
experience. It gives them hope that they have the potential to be the person
they want to be. When people aren't represented by the heroes in the media,
they don't have examples of people like them who achieved success. This can
make a person feel like their goals are unattainable, which is a discouraging
experience and often a self-fulfilling prophecy.

A pantheon of heroes that isn't representative of the members of a society
sends the message that only certain kinds of people qualify as heroes, no
matter how brave or selfless or caring they might be. Heroes are supposed to
tell us what we need to do to be better people, but poor representation
corrupts this purpose by telling us that heroism is something you are, not
something you do.

# People need to feel validated and acknowledged

When the people in media look and act like you do—when it’s been that way your
entire life—representation feels like a given. To someone who is used to having
ample representation, it may not be obvious how many others are not being
fairly represented, and it may be hard to understand how isolating it can feel.

When almost nobody in the media is like you, it feels exclusionary. When the
lack of representation is so pervasive, it can feel more like a deliberate
omission than an accidental oversight. It can make minorities feel like society
doesn't want or value people like them—like society is trying to erase them or
pretend they don't exist. We all want to feel accepted, but the media
consistently tells minority groups that they are not welcome in our society.

For people who face adversity, having little-to-no representation in the media
can be an invalidating experience because it sends the message that their
problems are too trivial or unimportant to acknowledge—or even that they don't
exist. Without the affirmation that they are not alone in their struggle,
underrepresented minorities can feel isolated.

In some cases, poor representation can go beyond just making people feel
invisible; it can actively deny their existence. As we form new communities and
coin new terms to celebrate and understand the identities that our society has
repressed for so long, some people will always be unwilling to leave behind old
labels and assumptions. Sometimes, when people don’t understand some aspect of
a person's identity, instead of seeking to understand it, they will deny its
existence. This is one of the most invalidating things you can do to a
person—refusing to acknowledge their strengths, weaknesses, struggles,
differences, and defining qualities.

Poor or absent media representation feeds into this problem by denying minority
groups the simple acknowledgement of their existence. When a group is not just
poorly represented, but completely ignored by the media, it can leave members
of that group feeling alienated and invalidated. This form of exclusion doesn't
necessarily happen out of hatred or malice; it can happen even when content
creators have good intentions.

# Media influences public opinion

Members of marginalized minorities often struggle just to be accepted by their
peers. For many of these people, adversity and discrimination are a fact of
everyday life. Many minorities have to hide who they are just to be treated
with common dignity and respect, and many others don't have that option. Public
opinion influences how different minorities are treated in different parts of
the world, causing many to be seen as alien, inferior, sub-human or *other*.

People tend to inherit the opinions of the culture in which they grew up.
Homogeneous communities with little diversity are especially at risk of
becoming echo chambers of prejudice in which hateful attitudes are passed down
through generations and residents are never exposed to contrary views. People
in these communities can form dehumanizing narratives about other groups
because, in many cases, they don't know much about them. It's easier to hate
someone you've never met because you never risk having your assumptions about
them challenged.

Public opinion fuels discrimination against minorities, and the media has the
power to influence public opinion. The media is a platform through which ideas
and attitudes are disseminated, and we can use it to alter the narratives
people have constructed about minorities. By giving minorities representation
in the media, we can educate members of the public about different minority
groups by disproving stereotypes and eliminating stigmas. The media can reach
homogeneous communities to combat a lack of diversity and its influence on
public opinion. Through adequate representation, we can give reaffirm the
humanity of marginalized minorities in the mind of the public by demonstrating,
through example, that they're people like anyone else.

# Media influences how we form our identity

Much of our culture—including what actions and behaviors we consider to be
socially acceptable or appropriate—is defined through the media; the media sets
the goalposts for what we call “normal.” In this way, a society forms its own
definition of normalcy, which almost always describes that society's majority
demographic. “Normal” is an inherently arbitrary distinction which serves to
alienate minorities because of their differences, and the media is a tool for
enabling this discrimination. Poor representation perpetuates this exclusive
definition of “normal,” which is problematic not just because it affects how
minorities are perceived by the rest of society, but also because it can
influence how they see themselves.

When the media barrages us with its insular notions of normalcy, people who
don’t fit those archetypes are left without a sense of identity. When people
don't fit society's definition of “normal,” they can feel lost, like they don't
belong anywhere. When the media fails to represent the broad spectrum of ways
in which people can identify, it leaves minorities feeling like their identity
isn't valid because it doesn't fit neatly into the boxes prescribed by society.
For some groups, a complete absence of representation can leave them unaware
that others like them even exist.

The effect that poor representation has on our identity can also influence our
self-esteem. When people never seen others like them in the media, they can
feel like it's not okay to be who they are, like there's something wrong with
them, like they're broken. For these people, the media sends a clear message
that they are not normal and that being abnormal is not okay.

Having little-to-no representation in the media can also cause people to
suppress their emotions and mask their identity. When the media refuses to
represent—or even acknowledge—you, it can feel like society is denying your
existence. When society tells you that you don't exist, that you can't exist,
that you're an impossibility… you start to believe it. You start to question
your own identity and whether you really know who you are. You start to repress
the thoughts and feelings which don't conform to societal norms. No amount of
pretending can change who you are, yet many minorities repress their true
identities in a desperate attempt to fit society's expectations of them. For
people in this situation, their own happiness is secondary to society's need
for conformity; they are so worried about what society tells them they *should*
want that they are unable to pursue the things that will truly bring them
fulfillment.

# Participation isn't the same as representation

Including minority characters in a story isn't the same as representing them.
Diversity in a cast doesn't constitute fair representation unless that
diversity extends beyond supporting roles. When minorities are relegated to
secondary roles, their representation consists of flat, token characters. This
is a problem because a simplified character gives people a simplified
understanding of the group that character represents.

Flat characters tend to be based on generalizations, and when these characters
are representing minority groups, they will inevitably reinforce the
stereotypes and stigmas of the culture that created them. By failing to create
complex, three-dimensional minority characters, the media homogenizes entire
demographics and promotes misunderstanding.
