---
title: "The Cultural Model of Gender"
slug: "the-cultural-model-of-gender"
id: "79adf5c6-ca0b-47e6-a33e-4b583b654fdb"
date: "2020-10-07T18:58:00Z"
description: >
    Trans folks talk a lot about how we conceptualize gender, but I don't think
    enough attention is paid to how gender is influenced by the culture we're
    brought up in. We generally think of gender as an innate identity
    independent of external factors, but the basic premise of what gender is
    varies widely between human cultures.
categories:
    - "gender"
tags:
    - "culture"
    - "gender"
    - "gender binary"
    - "non-binary"
    - "third gender"
    - "transgender"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawley@duck.com"
favorite: false
---

Within the transgender community, there are different conceptual models we use
for understanding gender. These kinds of models help us answer questions like,
"At what point is a trans woman considered a woman?". Is it when she begins
identifying as a woman? When other people start thinking of or referring to her
as a woman? When she reaches some milestone in her transition? Or has she
always been a woman, even from birth? The answers to these questions many vary
based on context and who you ask. Most trans people consider their gender to be
an innate part of their identity, and they don't think of their transition as
"switching" genders so much as embracing who they are. This *innate identity*
model of gender is probably the most widely accepted conceptual model of gender
among trans people in contemporary Western culture, but there are more
components to gender than just identity alone.

The multi-faceted nature of gender becomes evident when we take a look at the
ambiguity in the language we use to talk about gender. When people refer to
their gender, sometimes they're referring to the label they use to describe
themselves ("I am a woman."), sometimes they're referring to how they act and
present themselves ("I was in girl mode when I went to the grocery store
earlier today."), sometimes they're referring to how other people see and refer
to them ("The cashier totally thought I was a woman!"), sometimes they're
referring to their physical characteristics ("I want to start hormones so I can
be a woman."), sometimes they're referring to their gender assigned at birth,
("I'm assigned male at birth."), and sometimes they're referring to something
else entirely. Typically, people in trans communities explain gender using the
"genderbread person" model, where we decompose the concept of gender into a few
distinct components like identity, expression, and physiology. In this model,
we think of each component as existing on a two-axis plane, with male/masculine
on one axis and female/feminine on the other.

Something that isn't talked about often in trans communities is how culture
influences our gender identity. Cultures throughout human history have had
widely different attitudes toward gender, and it turns out that our genderbread
person model doesn't account for all the variations in gender that have existed
throughout history. Even this flexible model of gender provides a fairly
limited view of how humans can understand gender, and it really only represents
a contemporary, Western view.

For many cultures with third genders—a term anthropologists use to describe any
gender which falls outside the binary—gender has been intrinsically tied to not
just identity, expression, and physiology, but social class, occupation,
religion, sexuality, and other aspects of life. In many cultures, one's gender
determines their social class and occupation or vice versa; people of certain
genders hold certain positions in society and government, have certain careers,
and enjoy certain legal rights. Religion is an important part of gender in some
cultures, where people of some genders hold particular religious significance
or have certain religious duties. While we typically consider gender and
sexuality to be completely independent, in many cultures, they are
intrinsically connected—people's attraction is part of what determines their
gender.

While understanding other cultures' attitudes toward gender can be an important
step in deconstructing toxic gender norms in our own culture, it's important
that we don't romanticize or idealize these cultures. In some cultures with
third genders, forced sterilization and castration of gender minorities is
practiced. Often third genders exist to allow women to have certain legal
rights in highly patriarchal societies. Gender minorities in some cultures are
forced into certain occupations—often sex work. Many of these cultures suffer
from systematic inequality and rigid gender roles, similar to our culture.

The wide variance in how humans have understood and continue to understand
gender across cultures shows that the genderbread person model of gender is an
artifact of how *we* understand gender and not what gender is or can be. Our
contemporary Western understanding of gender is deeply rooted in the gender
binary and Western gender norms. We use the term "non-binary" to be inclusive
of any gender identity which falls outside the binary, but most non-binary
people in our culture still define their gender in relation to the gender
binary—some combination of male and female.

This isn't to say that the genderbread person model is *bad* or that our
understanding of gender is invalid or incomplete; our culture has as much a
right to our own concepts of gender as any other. However, when having
conversations about gender, it's important to realize that gender is influenced
by one's culture as much as by innate identity. Gender identity cannot be fully
divorced from culture, because a person's gender can only be fully understood
in the context of the culture in which they live. Transphobic people often
decry attempts at widespread acceptance and visibility for non-binary genders
under the premise that it's all propaganda designed to recruit impressionable
young people to our wicked cause. While these denouncements are obviously
laughable and baseless, how trans people understand their identity is
influenced by the cultural norms of our time. In a different time and place,
that same trans person may have understood their gender identity differently.
When having conversations about what gender is and what it can be, I think a
more culturally aware understanding of gender would be beneficial to all of us.
