---
title: "White Lies and Approximate Definitions"
slug: "white-lies-and-approximate-definitions"
id: "ccbdf3be-8d79-4073-ad16-30cfb003fb25"
date: "2021-05-11T22:07:00Z"
description: >
    Sometimes explaining my identity to non-queer folks means giving
    definitions that aren't entirely accurate—little white lies that make
    coming out easier. And I sometimes wonder if these half-truths amount to a
    betrayal of the community.
categories:
    - "language"
    - "orientation"
tags:
    - "aromantic"
    - "asexual"
    - "gender"
    - "language"
    - "non-binary"
    - "transgender"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawley@nothingradical.blog"
favorite: true
---

*This post was written for the [May 2021 Carnival of
Aces](https://bringonthepigeons.wordpress.com/2021/05/05/carnival-of-aces-call-for-submissions-may-2021-word-and-conceptualizations/),
where the theme is "Words and Conceptualizations."*

You know how sometimes you tell those little white lies because the truth is
just too complicated to explain? You don't intent to mislead anyone, but
telling the full story would take too long, so you just say something that's
not quite true and not quite false so you can get the point across. Sometimes
coming out as queer can feel like that. Previously, I wrote about [the many
layers of my
identity](https://nothingradical.blog/2021/05/08/the-layer-cake-of-my-identity/),
where I explain the different sets of labels I use to describe my sexual and
romantic orientation depending on who I'm talking to. I realized that the
circumstances under which I'm coming out doesn't just affect the *labels* I
use, but also the *definitions* I use. Coming out to people sometimes requires
providing definitions, and sometimes the definitions I give aren't entirely
accurate—they're little white lies that make coming out easier.

The ace community typically defines "asexual" as "a person who does not
experience sexual attraction." While the language surrounding asexuality has
changed a lot over the decades[^1], this has been the definition used by most
aces since sometime in the early 2000s. One would think, then, that this would
make coming out as asexual somewhat simple. Just give them the definition! The
problem is that this concise definition requires some context to understand.
The phrase "sexual attraction" was chosen by the ace community to mean
something specific, but to someone outside the community, it's not always
immediately clear what exactly "sexual attraction" means or how it differs from
having a libido, having sexual experience, or experiencing other forms of
attraction. The language of "attraction" and the specific definition we give it
is deeply entrenched in the discourse of aspec communities, and the phrase
"sexual attraction" alone doesn't convey any information about the
conceptualization schemes needed to contextualize it.

When talking to someone who's never heard of asexuality before, I tend to shy
away from the "official" definition because I feel like it requires a lengthy
explanation to properly contextualize. I tend to say something less precise,
like, "I'm not really interested in sex." or "I don't like boys *or* girls."
These are inadequate definitions because of the way the former conflates sexual
orientation with sex-favorability and the way the second is ambiguous about
what the word "like" entails (and assumes a gender binary). How much educating
I'm willing to do depends on the context, but there are many cases where I'm
okay leaving someone with an incomplete understanding of asexuality if it
satisfies their curiosity. These are the sorts of approximate definitions I
tend to give people when I'm not in the mood to break out a projector and slide
deck but still want to answer their question truthfully.

I tend to use these sorts of approximate definitions when talking about my
romantic orientation as well. As I discussed in my previous post, I often avoid
discussing my romantic orientation as something distinct from my sexual
orientation when talking to someone who's not queer or familiar with aspec
communities. When I do feel the need to pull out the term "aromantic" and have
to come up with a definition for it, I tend to avoid talking about "romantic
attraction" for reasons similar to why I avoid defining asexuality in terms of
sexual attraction. Additionally, providing this kind of definition of
aromanticism often involves talking about the concept of [differentiated
attraction](https://nextstepcake.wordpress.com/2020/04/30/naming-differentiating-attraction-orientations/),
which is a whole lesson onto itself. To avoid the need for a protracted lecture
on the topic, I might just say something like, "I'm not really interested in
dating." This is a poor definition, as many aros *do* desire romantic or
queerplatonic relationships[^2], but it might get the extended family to stop
asking if you have a girlfriend at Thanksgiving.

Being non-binary, talking about my gender also often involves providing
definitions, and these definitions tend to be approximate rather than
comprehensive ones. I'll typically define my gender as being "somewhere between
a man and a woman." I don't particularly like this definition, as I think it
implies that gender is a one-dimensional spectrum from male to female, and I
prefer to think of my gender as falling on a two-dimensional spectrum with
"maleness" on one axis and "femaleness" on the other. However, for someone who
has only ever understood gender as a binary, I think the approximate definition
is a good starting point.

Talking about being trans with someone who's not familiar with the topic
typically requires providing some background information, like explaining the
difference between sex and gender. This is a thorny one, as "gender" is a
somewhat nebulous concept which is understood differently by different people
and [different
cultures](https://nothingradical.blog/2020/10/07/the-cultural-model-of-gender/).
If I were feeling particularly self-indulgent, I might define "gender" as "a
big pile of wibbly-wobbly timey-wimey fuckshit," however this sort of
definition isn't particularly helpful for someone who's trying to learn.
Usually, I'll explain that sex is determined by biological characteristic like
hormones, chromosomes, and genitals, while gender is defined by psychological
characteristics like how you dress, how you act, and how you feel internally.
This definition is somewhat problematic in that it conflates gender identity
with gender expression, which is particularly relevant to me as a non-binary
person who doesn't present perfectly androgynously. Trying to explain the
concept of gender identity, however, usually involves saying things like, "I
just *feel* non-binary," which is somewhat ambiguous and difficult for a cis
person to relate to. It's often more helpful to explain gender in terms of
things that are easier to understand, like presentation.

Sometimes, coming out requires telling little white lies about my identity to
make the process easier. I'm sometimes afraid that giving these kinds of
approximate definitions amounts to a betrayal of the community, like I'm
undoing the hard work that has been done to spread awareness and debunk myths.
I always feel that there's pressure to be a good ambassador to the queer
communities I represent and uphold the oath that I took on my copy of the Queer
Agenda. Because of that, I always try to lead with a disclaimer that my
experiences don't necessarily represent those of other queer people. As much as
I would like to educate every person I come across, I don't always have the
energy and patience for it, and they don't always actually care that much about
the specifics. Hopefully someday better public awareness of queer identities
will mean that these stopgap definitions are no longer necessary.

[^1]: If you're curious about this, I wrote a history of the language of
  asexuality in the decades before AVEN was founded, which you can read
  [here](https://nothingradical.blog/2021/05/04/the-language-of-asexuality-before-aven/).
[^2]: Not all people in queerplatonic relationships use romance-coded language
  like "dating" to describe their relationship. I wrote more about this issue
  [here](https://nothingradical.blog/2021/04/30/the-amatanormativity-in-romance-coded-language/).
