---
title: "The Language of Asexuality Before AVEN"
slug: "the-language-of-asexuality-before-aven"
id: "fb54f945-7842-480b-90c7-b8b6653a6632"
date: "2021-05-04"
lastmod: "2022-05-26T01:28:00Z"
description: >
    It's hard to understate how pivotal the Asexual Visibility and Education
    Network was in shaping the modern asexual community, including much of the
    language aces use to describe their identity. But what about before AVEN?
    What did it mean to be asexual? This essay is my attempt at tracing the
    history of the usage of the term "asexual."
categories:
    - "language"
tags:
    - "asexual"
    - "feminism"
    - "history"
    - "labels"
    - "language"
    - "satanism"
---

*Update (25 May 2022): While I mentioned it in passing, this essay doesn't
really cover the Haven for the Human Amoeba community very much, which is a
shame, because it was an important part of early ace history. Unforunately, at
the time I originally researched and wrote this, Yahoo Groups had been shut
down and the HHA archive was lost media.*

*However, since then, [with help from Sennkestra and Phoenix the
II](https://www.asexuality.org/en/topic/190662-python-coders-wanted-help-save-the-haven-for-the-human-amoeba-archives/),
the archive is back! [You can browse it here on Ace
Archive](https://hha.acearchive.lgbt/). Hopefully in the future I will make a
followup post talking more about that community specifically. I've also updated
many of the other links in this essay to link to Ace Archive, where many of the
images and document scans have been transcribed.*

The asexual community as we know it today is quite young; while the broader
LGBTQ rights movement is usually traced back to the [Stonewall
Riots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stonewall_riots) of 1969, the modern
asexual community evolved much later. The founding of the [Asexual Visibility
and Education Network](https://asexuality.org/) (AVEN) in 2001 was an important
milestone in the asexual movement; the organization was the first to make
serious inroads promoting public awareness of asexuality and spawned one of the
first large, cohesive online communities for aces. One of the most significant
impacts the AVEN community has had is establishing and standardizing the
language of asexuality, including the term "asexual." Before AVEN, people who
would come to identify as asexual went by various names, and there was not a
common understanding of what asexuality meant. Today, the organization's
website defines "asexual" as "a person who does not experience sexual
attraction" in a banner at the top of the page; it's the first thing you see
when you visit the website, and the importance of this definition can't be
overstated in terms of how it allowed many fractured and disparate communities
to come together under a single banner.

Understanding how important it was for the ace community to standardize the
language of asexuality raises the question of what this language looked like
before AVEN. In this essay, I want to trace the history of the term "asexual"
and the terms which preceded it, and I want to take a look at how asexuality
has been defined over the decades and how we came to our modern understanding
of it. This account will focus heavily on academic literature from the 19th and
20th centuries and how they incorporated asexuality into their typologies of
human sexuality. We'll also take a look at the first asexual activists and
asexual communities which emerged in the early years of the LGBTQ rights
movement. We'll continue chronologically from the first mentions of asexuality
in academic literature up until the founding of AVEN in 2001. Finally, we'll
analyze some of the trends which emerged over the history of asexuality.

In 1869, Karl-Maria Kertbeny [authored two pamphlets protesting Prussian sodomy
laws](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/kertbeny-paragraph-143/). In these
writings, he famously coins the terms *heterosexual* and *homosexual*. Less
well-known is that he also coined the term *monosexual* to refer to people who
exclusively masturbate. While this isn't quite how we define asexuality today,
Kertbeny helped pioneer the idea that sexuality is an innate quality rather
than a choice, and this makes his writings one if the first cases where
something resembling asexuality is both recognized as a sexual orientation and
given a name.

Richard von Krafft-Ebing writes about asexuality in his 1886 work
[*Psychopathia Sexualis* (*Psychopathy of
Sex*)](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/krafft-ebing-psychopathia-sexualis/).
In it, he uses the term *anesthesia sexual* to refer to people with an "absence
of sexual feeling." He provides several case studies of people who he believes
fit this description, explaining, "These functionally sexless individuals are
rare cases, and, indeed, always persons having degenerative defects, in whom
other functional cerebral disturbances, states of psychical degeneration, and
even anatomical signs of degeneration, may be observed." The cases described in
Krafft-Ebing's work describe people who clearly seem to be asexual by our
modern definition, but most of these cases don't mention anything of the
"defects" or "degeneration" that Krafft-Ebing insists they experience. This is
likely one of the first examples of the pathologization of asexual people which
continues to this day.

Another early attempt at creating a sexual typology which includes asexuality
came from German sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld. Hirschfeld is known for founding
the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee in 1897, which was the first LGBTQ rights
organization in history and campaigned against the legal persecution of sexual
and gender minorities. Later, he would go on to found the *Institut für
Sexualwissenschaft* (Institute of Sex Research) in 1919, which advocated for
sex education, contraception, treatment of STDs, and the emancipation of women.
The Institute offered marriage and sex counseling, gender-affirming
endocrinologic and surgical services for transgender patients, and
"transvestite passes" which allowed transgender people to present in public
without facing legal persecution. Among this long list of accomplishments,
Hirschfeld also published the pamphlet [*Sappho und
Sokrates*](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/hirschfeld-sappho-und-sokrates/) in
1896, which recognizes people without any sexual desire under the label
"anesthesia sexual"—the same term used by Krafft-Ebing. In this work,
Hirschfeld also develops a quantitative scale for describing human sexuality
which rates the intensity of same-sex and opposite-sex attraction on separate
axes, each from 1 to 10. Many sexologists would attempt to create scales for
rating human sexuality, but this is the first I was able to find which
explicitly accounts for asexuality.

German sexologist Emma Trosse not only gave us a definition of asexuality, but
was openly asexual herself. Trosse was the first woman to [publish a scientific
work on homosexuality in
women](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/trosse-ein-weib/) and advocated for
legal protections for sexual minorities. In her 1897 work *Ein Weib?
Psychologisch-biographische: Studie über eine  Konträrsexuelle* (*A woman?
Psychological-biographical study of a contrary-sexual*), she gives us a
definition of asexuality under the label *Sinnlichkeitslosigkeit* (asensuality)
and says in a footnote, "Author has the courage to admit to this category."

One of the earliest uses of the term "asexual" in literature I found comes from
Otto Weininger's misogynist diatribe [*Sex and
Character*](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Sex_Character/pVbqiVGl6tsC).
In it, Weininger denigrates women for sexually tempting men, asserting
confidently that it is not possible for a woman to be asexual, going as far as
to say, "And it is clear that if only one single female creature were really
asexual, or could be shown to have a real relationship to the idea of personal
moral worth, everything that I have said about woman, its general value as
psychically characteristic of the sex, would be irretrievably demolished, and
the whole position which this book has taken up would be shattered at one
blow."

In 1916, 1918, and 1920, Hirschfeld published [*Sexualpathologie Teil I–III*
(*Sexual Pathology Part
I–III*)](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/hirschfeld-sexualpathologie/). In
these later works, he uses the terms *asexual* and *anerotic* to refer to
people with no sexual drive and speculates about what could cause people to be
this way. He considers that it could be a case of
[sublimation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sublimation_(psychology))—where
people are too devoted to their hobby or occupation to devote time or energy to
sex, exposure to anti-erotic literature, or low levels of sex hormones. While
this is the first usage of the term "asexual" to refer to human sexuality I was
able to find in scientific literature, Hirschfeld's analysis is incredibly
pathologizing and does not recognize asexuality as a sexual orientation in the
same way we do today. Hirschfeld also coins the term *automonosexual* to refer
to people who are sexually attracted to themselves. Unlike later works which
would make a distinction in their typology between asexual people with a libido
and those without, Hirschfeld seems to use this term specifically to refer to
people who are sexually excited by their own body, even going as far as to
compare one patient to Narcissus from Greek mythology. Hirschfeld talks at
length about automonosexualism in his transgender patients—his thoughts on this
topic seem to mirror those of Ray Blanchard, who would later coin the term
*autogynephilia* to describe a similar phenomenon[^5].

Another early usage of the term "asexual" comes from the 1933 work *The Sexual
Urge: How It Grows or Wanes* by Charles Samson Féré. However, this usage of the
term does not refer to a lack of libido or sexual attraction, but instead to
non-sexual motivations for jealousy in interpersonal relationships. An example
of this is the jealousy a child might feel when a parent's attention is focused
elsewhere. Féré writes, "The asexual nature of jealousy-psychosis shoes itself
in particular when it has regard to persons who have nothing to do with sexual
competition, e.g., the parents of those who excite the jealousy."

In another attempt to come up with a scientific explanation for asexuality,
Clifford Allen writes in his 1940 work *The Sexual Perversions and
Abnormalities* about asexuality as a form of sublimation. Unlike Hirschfeld's
theory about sublimation, Allen posits that asexuality is a defense mechanism
employed by people with "abnormal" sexual preferences (such as homosexuality or
paraphilias) in order to avoid those desires and replace them with non-sexual
ones. He writes, "By sublimation we mean the more or less conscious inhibition
of the abnormal instinctual object with the substitution of an asexual object."
This problematic attitude towards asexuality persists to this day with the
common myths that aces are "homosexuals in denial" or secretly pedophiles.

A more recognizable scientific work recognizing asexuality comes from American
biologist and sexologist Alfred Kinsey. Widely considered the father of the
sexual revolution in the US, Kinsey is most well-known for publishing the
Kinsey Reports in 1948 and 1953. In these works, he argues that humans cannot
be exclusively categorized as heterosexual or homosexual, and develops a scale
to rate human sexuality on a range from 0, meaning "exclusively heterosexual,"
to 6, meaning "exclusively homosexual." The scale also included an additional
"X" classification for people with "no socio-sexual contacts or reactions."
This report gives us some of the first demographic data on the prevalence of
asexuality, with 1.5% of adult male subjects and 19% of adult female subjects
falling into the "X" category. It's important to note, however, that the Kinsey
Scale was based on sexual *experiences* and not sexual attraction or
self-identity. This means his scale cannot distinguish between people who lack
sexual attraction and allosexual people who just lack sexual experience.
Additionally, the Kinsey Scale is a one-dimensional scale, which is a step
backwards in terms of accounting for asexual people when compared to the scale
developed by Hirschfeld in *Sappho und Sokrates*.

In the Kinsey Reports, Kinsey does not use the term "asexual" to refer to
people who fall into his "X" classification. Instead, in males[^6], Kinsey
talks about "apathy" towards sex, describing such individual as "low in sex
drive." Unlike Hirschfeld, Kinsey does not attempt to speculate on the causes
of asexuality, stating, "Whether the factors are biologic, psychologic, or
social, it is certain that such persons exist." Kinsey also rejects the idea
that asexuality is a form of sublimation, stating, "But such inactivity is no
more sublimation of sex drive than blindness or deafness or other perceptive
defects are sublimation of those capacities." Kinsey also takes a stance
against the notion that asexuality is a condition requiring treatment, saying,
"Considerable psychiatric therapy can be wasted on persons (especially females)
who are misjudged to be cases of repression when, in actuality, at least some
of them never were equipped to respond erotically." While Kinsey somewhat
misses the mark in defining asexuality, his work does make strides in
countering the pathologization of asexuals in scientific literature.

One of the first appearances of the term "asexual" in literature outside of
scientific publications comes from Anton Szandor LaVey's 1969 work *The Satanic
Bible*. Modern Satanism is an ideological movement which uses Satan as a
metaphor to promote personal autonomy, rationality, and pragmatic
skepticism[^9]. Satanists are nontheistic, and don't actually believe in Satan.
Rather, they reappropriate Satanic imagery from Christian theology to promote
causes like egalitarianism, social justice, and separation of church and state.
LaVey writes, "Satanism condones any type of sexual activity which properly
satisfies your individual desires—be it heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, or
even asexual, if you choose." In line with other Satanist thinkers, LaVey's
attitudes toward sexuality were remarkably progressive for the time. However,
his understanding of asexuality is still incomplete. He also writes:

> Asexuals are invariably sexually sublimated by their jobs or hobbies. All the
> energy and driving interest which would normally be devoted to sexual
> activity is channelled into other pastimes or into their chosen occupations.
> If a person favors other interests over sexual activity, it is his right, and
> no one is justified in condemning him for it. However, the person should at
> least recognize the fact that this is a sexual sublimation.

Like Hirschfeld, LaVey frames asexuality as a choice borne out of being too
caught up with one's hobbies and occupation to focus on sex. While this work is
one of the first to use the term "asexual" in a positive—or at least
neutral—tone instead of as a pathology or a pejorative, he fails to recognize
that one can lack sexual attraction.

In 1972, [*The Asexual
Manifesto*](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/orlando-the-asexual-manifesto/)
was written by Lisa Orlando and published by the New York Radical
Feminists[^7]. In this work, Orlando gives us a clear definition of asexuality
through a feminist lens, describing it as "relating sexually to no one." While
Orlando doesn't use the language of "sexual attraction" standardized by the
AVEN community, her work is one of the first to acknowledge a distinction
between libido and a desire to have sex with others; she explains, "if one has
sexual feelings they do not require another person for their expression."
Orlando is clear that asexuals can still desire nonsexual physical affection
and intimacy and rejects the common notion that sexual relationships are the
only way to achieve them. This is somewhat indicative of how later asexuals
would differentiate between sexual and sensual attraction.

*The Asexual Manifesto* is clearly a product of the feminism of the 1970s[^8];
Orlando frames asexuality as a form of protest against the patriarchal norm
that women exist for the sexual gratification of men, and she devotes
significant portions of it to talking about the sexual objectification of
women. However, she does point out that her caucus chose to reject the label
"anti-sexual," as they wanted to avoid the connotation that sexuality is
"degrading or somehow inherently bad." Unlike our modern understanding of
asexuality as a sexual orientation, Orlando's *Manifesto* frames asexuality as
a choice, and an inherently political one at that. Overall, this work is
notable for being one of the first pieces of literature written by asexuals for
the purpose of defining asexuality.

Lisa Orlando's *The Asexual Manifesto* was referenced in the [January 1973
issue](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/off-our-backs-vol-3-no-5/) of the
feminist news journal *Off Our Backs*, where the author mentions attending a
workshop on asexuality led by Barbara Getz—another member of the asexuality
caucus of the New York Radical Feminists. The article summarizes asexuality as,
"an orientation that regards a partner as nonessential to sex, and sex as
nonessential to a satisfying relationship." [The next issue of *Off Our
Backs*](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/choose-your-label-barnard-college/)
included a photo of activists at Barnard College with a sign that reads, "This
is a chance to choose your own label instead of having someone else do it for
you." followed by a list of labels including "asexual."

![A photo of activists at Barnard College with a sign advocating to "choose
your own
label"](https://bafkreigwewroyf4yokdjayboaxhr3nxrqp3543jwxdoda2zvjm3phtlup4.ipfs.dweb.link/?filename=choose-your-label.png)

*You can find a full transcript of the image and accompanying article
[here](https://bafybeibcqnvnslchlhxwnifrmljf6sskijatbgh6rpkqnjsnmmfz7oatui.ipfs.dweb.link/).*

Myra Johnson wrote [one of the first academic papers about
asexuality](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/johnson-asexual-and-autoerotic-women/)
in 1977, which was published as part of the book *The Sexually Oppressed*. In
the paper, Johnson distinguishes between people who are *asexual* and people
who are *autoerotic*. The former group consists of people who have no libido,
while the latter group consists of people who have a libido but have no desire
to have sex with others. The fact that she makes this distinction in her
typology is interesting, because while there is discourse about libido in the
modern asexual community—which has spawned microlabels like *autochorisexual*
and *aegosexual*—aces today generally define asexuality by attraction alone,
and the modern language of "sexual attraction" is absent in her writing. Still,
her paper is one of the first to call attention to the systemic social
oppression that asexual people face. She mentions how asexual people are
oppressed by their invisibility and the general consensus that they don't
exist, and she talks about how asexuality is commonly construed as being either
a religious obligation or a psychological problem, with no room for people who
don't feel sexual desire. Additionally, she is critical of the feminist
movements of the 1960s and 1970s—particularly how the sexual revolution fails
asexual and autoerotic women by glorifying the importance of sexual
availability and sexual desire. While this paper's typology and terminology
still differs from that which the asexual community would eventually settle on,
she is one of the first to bring attention to the social issues asexual people
face—issues which are still relevant today.

In 1979, sexologist Michael Storms [published a
study](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/storms-sexual-orientation-self-perception/)
creating a new scale for describing human sexuality. The *Erotic Response and
Orientation Scale* aims to explicitly include asexuality by mapping human
sexuality on two axes instead of the one axis used by the Kinsey Scale. The
purpose of this scale was to address the Kinsey Scale's inability to
distinguish between asexuality and bisexuality.  While this scale was a step in
the right direction in terms of accounting for asexuality, it still does not
account for aces who differentiate between different types of attraction; many
of the criteria used to place respondents on the scale refer to what some aces
would classify as sensual or romantic attraction rather than sexual attraction.

While at this point in history the use of the term "asexual" to refer to a
sexual orientation was starting to become more common, that doesn't mean there
wasn't significant confusion surrounding the term. In 1989, American talk show
host Sally Jesse Raphael
[interviewed](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/toby-on-sally/) autism rights
activist Jim Sinclair under the alias Toby. Jim is intersex, a self-described
neuter[^3] person, and asexual[^1]. This interview was the first time most
audience members had been introduced to these concepts, and it made such a
profound impact that many people confused being intersex, being neuter, and
being asexual for years after. In literature, the term *asexual* was often used
to refer to Jim's anatomy instead of *intersex*. An example of this is the 2004
book, [*Sexuality Now: Embracing
Diversity*](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/carroll-toby-an-asexual-person/).

![An excerpt from the book *Sexuality Now: Embracing Diversity* describing Jim
as "an asexual person" to refer to xirs
anatomy](https://bafkreidf5i5jflyx6e4lnk7y2ebrv6yz2ky62rh6vkmiptqvnphgsoxzly.ipfs.dweb.link/?filename=toby-an-asexual-person.png)

*You can find a full transcript of the article
[here](https://bafybeibiedyr57dtyyyt6nrzqgayla7sjd4obamuswi27qc3zard7owegy.ipfs.dweb.link/).*

In another example of scientific literature which gave credibility to the term
"asexual", Anthony Bogaert published [a
study](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/bogaert-asexuality-prevalence/) on the
prevalence of asexuality in 2004 in *The Journal of Sex Research*. In this
study, Bogaert defines asexuality as "the state of having no sexual attraction
for either sex," which is remarkably similar to the definition used by the AVEN
community. Bogaert also contrasts asexuality with sexual aversion disorder and
hypoactive sexual desire disorder[^2], making this an early example of a study
on asexuality which does not pathologize it. A major leap that this study makes
over previous research, such as the Kinsey Reports, is specifically defining
asexuality as the lack of sexual attraction and not a lack of sexual behavior
or self-identification as asexual. As a result, this study was the first to
give us a reliable estimate of the prevalence of asexuality without including
allosexual people who lack sexual experience or excluding asexual people who
have never heard the term before. Bogaert's study concludes that approximately
1% of people are asexual, which is a statistic that is still cited in ace
communities to this day.

At this point, some of the first online communities dedicated to asexuality
have started to emerge. In 1997, Zoe O'Reilly published a blog post titled ["My
life as an
amoeba"](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/oreilly-my-life-as-an-amoeba/).  In
the post, O'Reilly describes herself as asexual and talks about her experience
coming out to friends and family. While the term "asexual" was in more common
use at this point, this is the first instance of the term "amoeba" being used
as a tongue-in-cheek label for asexual people, which was popular in the late
1990s and early 2000s. After this, in 2000, a Yahoo group for asexuals called
the [Haven for the Human
Amoeba](https://acearchive.lgbt/artifact/haven-for-the-human-amoeba/) was
formed. This group was organized as a single email thread, and this structure
quickly became unwieldy as the community grew. The need for an online community
of asexuals with support for threaded discussions was quickly becoming
apparent.

Finally, in 2001, AVEN was founded by David Jay with the goals of promoting
public acceptance of asexuality and facilitating the growth of an asexual
community. Without a doubt, the organization has been the first to make serious
progress towards achieving those two goals.

The language of asexuality has a complicated history, and this account is by no
means exhaustive. Asexuality has gone by many different names and been defined
in many different ways over the decades, and it took until the early 21st
century for consensus among the community to emerge. Looking back over the
history of asexuality, a few general conclusions can be made. First, asexuality
was "discovered" and named independently several times by scientists and
activists going back to at least the mid 19th century, and it took until at
least the mid-to-late 20th century for the term "asexual" to become the
predominant label. Second, many of the people to first talk about asexuality,
especially in academic literature, were not themselves asexual. Third,
asexuality has been defined in many different ways over the decades; while some
historical definitions of asexuality do approximate the commonly understood
definition we use today, others have defined it as a lack of libido, a lack of
sexual experience, a lack of time and energy to devote to sex, a psychological
defense mechanism, and even a political ideology. Fourth, for much of the
history of sexology, asexuality has been pathologized in scientific literature,
with many scientists attempting to devise scientific explanations for its
causes.

All of this raises the question of why asexuality took so long to be understood
and develop a community when compared to other sexual and gender minorities. Of
course, the LGBTQ movement as a whole has had to fight tooth and nail to
develop a community and gain public recognition, but those things came later
for asexuals than for most other people in the community. Is the issue one of
demographics—that there aren't as many of us? Or is the story of asexuality a
testament to how deeply rooted allonormativity is in our society? Whatever the
case, with how quickly the ace community has grown in recent years, only good
things can come.

[^1]: Jim doesn't use the term "asexual" in the interview, but xe does describe
  xirself as asexual in an essay xe wrote titled ["Personal Definitions of
  Sexuality"](https://web.archive.org/web/20090206234438/http://web.syr.edu:80/~jisincla/definitions.htm).
[^2]: The [DSM-5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DSM-5) would later clarify that
  this disorder does not apply to asexual people.
[^3]: Jim uses the term "neuter" to describe xir gender identity and expression
  in much the same way the term "non-binary" is used today.
[^5]: [Autogynephilia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blanchard's_transsexualism_typology)
  is a now-discredited theory which attempts to explain sexuality in
  transgender women. His findings have been rejected by the
  [WPATH](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Professional_Association_for_Transgender_Health)
  as lacking empirical evidence.
[^6]: The Kinsey Reports consist of two works: "Sexual Behavior in the Human
  Male" and "Sexual Behavior in the Human Female." As a result, Kinsey analyzes
  the sexuality of men and women separately.
[^7]: For more background on the context behind *The Asexual Manifesto* and
  Lisa Orlando, see [this blog
  post](https://asexualagenda.wordpress.com/2019/08/01/lisa-orlando-author-of-the-asexual-manifesto-1972/)
  by Siggy where he interviews Orlando.
[^8]: For more background information on the history of asexuality and celibacy
  in early radical feminism, see [this blog
  post](https://asexualagenda.wordpress.com/2018/08/29/asexuality-in-early-radical-feminism-part-1/)
  by Siggy.
[^9]: For an example of a contemporary Satanist organization, see [The Satanic
  Temple](https://thesatanictemple.com/).
