---
title: "Deconstructing Label Culture"
slug: "deconstructing-label-culture"
id: "26f7c53a-8b72-4b42-81e5-16695643ccf4"
date: "2020-06-17T21:25:00Z"
description: >
    There's a lot of discourse both inside and outside of queer communities
    about microlabels. To many non-queer people, they represent an epidemic of
    excessive sensitivity and political correctness, but many queer folks also
    have misgivings about microlabels. This is my attempt at parsing out the
    good and bad of label culture.
categories:
    - "language"
tags:
    - "identity"
    - "label culture"
    - "labels"
    - "microlabels"
    - "spectrums"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawley@duck.com"
favorite: false
---

While most people are familiar with the most common labels queer people use to
describe their identities, there are a number of microlabels used by specific
subsets of the community that rarely see use outside them. Most people have
heard the terms *lesbian*, *gay*, *bisexual*, and *transgender*, but most
people have not heard of terms like *demisexual*, *omnisexual*, *quoiromantic*,
or *bigender*. The purpose of labels like these is to describe specific
identities and orientations which aren't explicitly covered by more common
labels, and over the past few decades, especially as online communities have
grown, the number of microlabels used by queer communities has exploded. This
obsession with forming a comprehensive taxonomy of orientation and identity
labels has spawned a sort of label culture, one which has become a source of
contention both inside and outside the LGBTQ+ community. Many cishet (cisgender
heterosexual) people make fun of the ever-expanding LGBTQ+ initialism and how
it represents, in their eyes, an epidemic of excessive sensitivity and
political correctness. Many queer people criticize label culture for eroding
the credibility of the movement—making people take queers less seriously.
Despite these misgivings—many of which are valid criticisms—labels do serve a
purpose in the community. The question to be answered is whether label culture
does more harm than good.

Identity labels are incredibly useful to queer communities because they provide
language with with which to discuss common experiences. The explosion of new
identity labels over the past few decades is largely a product of our
understanding of queer identities expanding and becoming more nuanced. Over
time, we've realized that not everyone's experiences can be categorized neatly
into a half dozen or so labels, and identity is a spectrum with many
dimensions. It turns out that sexuality is more complicated than "men, women,
or both," sexual and romantic orientations don't always match, gender is not a
binary, sex is not a binary, and identities can be fluid and change over time.
Identity is complicated, and we can't discuss and further our understanding of
it without the necessary language.

Having a robust vocabulary with which to discuss queer identities isn't just
useful from an academic standpoint—it's also beneficial to closeted and
questioning people. Labels help those who are questioning their identity to
find a community of people like them—a critical step for many queer people in
the process in coming out and accepting themselves. Finding a label that
describes their experiences even helps a lot of closeted people start the
questioning process by showing them that their experiences are not unique. Many
people go through life feeling broken because they don't realize that there are
other people out there like them (something that doesn't just apply to queer
communities), and discovering their identity can be an affirming and liberating
experience.

Identity labels also serve as a source of pride for many queer people. In the
face of systemic oppression, it can be hard for queer people to be proud of
their identity. Pride parades aren't just for visibility; they're a public
celebration of the identities which people have long been made to feel ashamed
of. Pride is important to queer people, and identity labels are a part of that.
Even if someone describes their identity using microlabels which aren't likely
to be understood outside of a small community, those labels are still
meaningful to them.

For all the good identity labels do, they also do harm. For one thing, labels
divide communities. What we call "the LGBTQ+ community" is really a collection
of many communities, most of which are built around different queer identities.
As we continue to subdivide these identities with increasing granularity, the
communities become fragmented. There is a tremendous amount of infighting
between queer communities—more than most cishet people realize—and while most
queer people are campaigning for the same rights, liberties, and freedoms,
constant infighting sabotages this effort. Fragmenting communities only
exacerbates this issue, creating more boundaries and walls. It's important that
people be able to find groups of people like them to share experiences with,
but the LGBTQ+ community needs unity, and fragmentation is antithetical to that
goal.

Another problem with label culture is the way it polices identity. While the
intention behind more specific labels is to expand our understanding of queer
identities, in practice, labels artificially limit how people can identity and
are used to gatekeep. Queer people often use the concept of *spectrums* to
explain and understand queer identities; sexual orientation, romantic
orientation, gender, and sex all exist on multidimensional spectrums. Labels
are incompatible with the concept of spectrums—they are inherently discrete,
whereas spectrums are continuous. No matter how many labels are created, people
will always exist in the spaces between them. Every queer experience is unique,
and trying to force people to choose a label only limits their understanding of
themself. Labels are also used by communities, both intentionally and
unintentionally, to gatekeep. People who don't meet a community's strict
definition of a given label are often barred from membership in that community,
and people whose identity isn't neatly described by any existing labels are
left without one. The purpose of labels is supposed to be to aid inclusivity,
but instead they're being used to do the opposite.

Cishet people often ask, "Why do you need all these labels? Why can't people
just be people?" This idea of a post-label society in which people can just be
themselves and feel comfortable in their identities without the need to label
them is attractive for many queer people, and it avoids many of the problems
label culture creates. However, in a cisnormative and heteronormative society
where people are taught that they are cisgender and heterosexual until proven
otherwise, we need a common language to share our experiences so that closeted
queer people can find communities, learn to accept themselves, and not have to
go through life feeling broken. Still, that doesn't meant that some of the
problems of label culture can't be addressed. There are identity frameworks,
such as [relationship
anarchy](https://nothingradical.blog/2020/06/14/what-is-relationship-anarchy/), which
seek to obviate the need for labels by taking a descriptive rather than a
prescriptive approach to identity. The idea is that people can focus on what
their identity and orientation mean to them and how they affect their life, and
either choose a label which they think fits that or eschew labels entirely. We
shouldn't be too quick to cancel labels, because they are still useful to a lot
of people. However, we need to normalize the act of going without labels,
because not everyone wants or needs them.
