---
title: "Plotting My Queer Identity on the Convergence-Divergence Spectrum"
slug: "plotting-my-queer-identity-on-the-convergence-divergence-spectrum"
id: "8d60e612-1268-41c7-87d8-a75bbb570e58"
date: "2022-01-18"
description: >
    I use Coyote's concept of a convergent-divergent spectrum to describe some
    feelings about my identity I've been trying to piece together for a while.
categories:
    - "language"
    - "orientation"
tags:
    - "aromantic"
    - "asexual"
    - "convergence-divergence spectrum"
    - "identity"
    - "language"
    - "limerence"
    - "polyamory"
    - "quoiromantic"
    - "relationship anarchy"
    - "romance"
    - "spectrums"
    
---
*This post was written for the [January 2022 Carnival of
Aces](https://bringonthepigeons.wordpress.com/2022/01/05/january-2022-carnival-of-aces-divergence-vs-convergence/),
where the theme is "Divergence vs. Convergence."*

This month's prompt got me thinking again about my queer identity—not just my
romantic and sexual orientation, but how they relate to the very queer way I go
about relationships. Coyote's concept of a divergent-convergent spectrum for
understanding queer identities introduces some new language to describe
feelings I've been trying to piece together for a while: how there are some
aspects of my orientation that I consider completely independent and others
that I feel can't be meaningfully separated from one another.

I talked in ["Confessions of a Former 'SAM
Aro'"](https://nothingradical.blog/2021/09/16/confessions-of-a-former-sam-aro/)
about how I don't really identify with the concept of a romantic orientation in
the way it's prescribed by the ubiquitous split-attraction model; the whole
concept of "romantic attraction" isn't really intuitive to me, and I don't find
it a useful conceptualization for modeling my identity. Instead, I prefer to
use the term "aro" to mean that I don't do romance and relationships in a
conventional way. I use many labels to describe my approach to romance and
relationships—aromantic, quoiromantic, polyamorous, relationship anarchist—and
to me, these concepts are so intertwined that they're difficult to meaningfully
separate.

Most people would consider terms like "aromantic" and "quoiromantic" to
describe a romantic orientation (or lack of romantic orientation or
disidentification with the concept) and terms like "polyamorous" and
"relationship anarchist" to describe a *relationship style*. These things are
typically considered to be separate, unrelated concepts, to such an extent that
having a non-hetero romantic orientation is typically considered queer, while
having a non-monogamous relationship style, on its own, is typically not.

However, for me, these facets of my identity are actually fairly
interconnected. They all boil down to the fact that I don't distinguish
platonic feelings and relationships from romantic feelings and relationships—at
least not in a conventional way. I have lots of different kinds of
interpersonal relationships in my life, and I'm not really comfortable strictly
classifying them as either "romantic" or "platonic."

This manifests as me being aromantic because it means that a lot of the social
scripts and courtship rituals associated with romance don't really make sense
for me. If I don't distinguish between romantic and platonic relationships,
what does it mean for me to date someone? To be partners with someone? To be
"in love" with someone? That's not to say that I won't consider someone a
partner or describe our relationship as dating or participate in romance-coded
activities, but I certainly don't seem to understand these concepts in the same
way an alloromantic person does.

I also consider myself aro because I don't relate to the concept of
[limerence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limerence). Since limerence is, as I
understand it, a large part of what differentiates romantic feelings from
platonic feelings among alloromantic people, I consider my disidentification
with the romantic/platonic binary to be intrinsically related with my lack of
experience with limerence and my aromanticism.

My approach to romance and relationships also manifests as me being
polyamorous. I don't see the sense in my intimate and affectionate
relationships being exclusive in much the same way most people don't see the
sense in their platonic friendships being exclusive. Typically romance is the
metric which determines whether a relationship is exclusive, but since I don't
make that distinction, it's not really obvious for me when a relationship is
"supposed" to be exclusive by normative standards.

I consider myself a relationship anarchist for the same reason; even other
polyamorous people tend to distinguish between friends and partners by the
presence of romance, but since I don't strictly classify my relationships as
romantic or non-romantic, the distinction between friends and partners is fuzzy
at best.[^1] A consequence of this is that I have relationships I call
friendships that most people would describe as romantic relationships, and I
have relationships I call partnerships that most people would describe as
friendships.

Because they all largely boil down to my disidentification with the
romantic/platonic binary, I consider my romantic orientation (or lack thereof)
and my relationship style to be *convergent* identities; they're so intertwined
that they're difficult to meaningfully separate, and often when I talk about
one, I'm also implicitly talking about the other. One thing Em mentions in the
call for submissions is that the convergence-divergence spectrum is more
complicated than just "do your romantic and sexual orientations match," and I
think my experience is a great example of that. However, I wouldn't necessarily
classify myself as a "convergent queer," because there are also aspects of my
identity that I consider more divergent.

Specifically, I consider my sexual orientation to be divergent from the
composite of my romantic orientation and relationship style. While my
relationship with the term "aromantic" is fairly complicated, my relationship
with my ace identity is actually fairly simple: I just don't relate to the
experience allosexual people call "sexual attraction." I consider this part of
my identity to be fairly independent of my approach to romance and
relationships; sex and sexual attraction just don't really have much bearing on
how I go about relationships.

So, in summary, I would consider my romantic orientation and relationship style
to be convergent identities, while my sexual orientation is divergent from both
of them. "Convergent" and "divergent" are probably not terms I will use often
when explaining my identity to others; they're esoteric enough that, for me at
least, they'll probably remain relegated to niche ontological discussions in
the ace blogosphere. This is much like how "quoiromantic" is the term that
*technically* describes my romantic orientation (or rather lack of romantic
orientation) the best, but I tend to stick with "aro" for the sake of
convenience. Still, I'm glad the terms exist, and I definitely feel that they
fill an important lexical gap.

[^1]: I do want to acknowledge that queerplatonic relationships exist and
  platonic partnerships are valid, but [I've written
  before](https://nothingradical.blog/2021/10/06/a-relationship-anarchist-perspective-on-qprs-and-friendship/)
  about how QPRs aren't really a concept I personally find very useful these
  days.
