---
title: "Being an Ambassador to the Queer Hive Mind"
slug: "being-an-ambassador-to-the-queer-hive-mind"
id: "a310da24-f586-499b-83f1-5d823aaacde9"
date: "2021-09-12T00:23:00Z"
description: >
    When I talk about my identity to someone outside one of my communities, I'm
    implicitly nominating myself as an ambassador to that community. What are
    my responsibilities when representing the communities I'm a part of? What
    about when some people in that community disagree with me?
categories:
    - "advocacy"
tags:
    - "advocacy"
    - "community"
    - "hive mind"
    - "identity"
    - "respectability politics"
author:
    name: "Frawley"
    email: "frawleyskid@gmail.com"
---

*This post was written for the [September 2021 Carnival of
Aces](https://acefilmreviews.wordpress.com/2021/09/01/carnival-of-aces-call-for-submissions-september-2021/),
where the theme is "The 'We' of Me."*

In minority communities, we tend to use language like, "the asexual community"
or "the trans community" to refer to the set of people in a particular identity
group. And while my queer and neurodivergent identities do give me a sense of
community and solidarity with other people like me, I find labeling identity
groups as "communities" to be somewhat disingenuous, as these groups are so
large and diverse that it's impossible to make generalizations about them. Even
when I do find myself talking about concepts like "the asexual community," what
I'm really referring to is the set of specific asexual communities I regularly
interact with, like the ace blogosphere, the ace communities on sites like
Reddit and Tumblr, and asexual people I personally know. It would be unfair of
me to assume that these specific communities are representative of the global
asexual population, so when I talk about "the ace community," what I really
mean is *my* ace community.

I often use language like "we" or "us" to refer to the groups I'm a part of as
a way of signaling my membership in those groups. But what exactly I mean by
"we" in these cases can be complicated and context-dependent, particularly when
I'm talking to people outside those communities. When I signal my group
membership to someone outside that group, I am implicitly nominating myself as
an ambassador to that community and electing to carrying the burden of
representing it. This is a challenging prospect, because I can only speak for
*my* ace community, but the person I'm talking to is likely to assume I'm
speaking for *all* ace communities. In my experience, people who aren't a
member of a minority community often have a bad habit of assuming that we're a
hive mind—that we all share the same thoughts, opinions, and perspectives. A
consequence of this is that when I'm acting as an ambassador to one of my
communities, who I include in my "we" influences how outsiders see and
understand it.

Being an ambassador means representing the vast diversity of opinions and
perspectives held by people within your community, some of which you are likely
to personally disagree with. For example, there are some autistic people who
have different perspectives about advocacy than I do, polyamorous people who
practice polyamory in different ways than I do, and aspec people who use
different conceptualization schemes than I do. While I might think differently
than these people, they have as much a right to an opinion as I do. What should
I do in these cases? Is it fair of me to only represent the perspectives I
personally agree with? What should I do in the case of an opinion that I don't
just respectfully disagree with, but consider harmful? Does my responsibility
change when I hold a minority opinion compared to the rest of the community?
While I can always explain that I don't agree with a particular opinion, do I
have a responsibility to at least acknowledge it? Is it irresponsible to allow
someone outside my community to assume my opinions are shared universally?

Oftentimes, when I use "we" to refer to one of my identity groups, I'm really
only referring to the subset of that group that feels the same way I do. This
subset might be a majority within the communities I'm a member of, but it would
be selection bias to assume that it's representative of the identity group as a
whole. I think sometimes there can be social pressure to actively dissociate
yourself from the members of your identity group that you disagree with on
important issues—an aversion to identifying with *those* people, the "bad"
ones. However, in doing this, I think it's easy to end up committing a No True
Scotsman fallacy: "They're not *really* a member of the neurodiversity
community if they support Autism Speaks" or "They're not *really* polyamorous
if they practice Don't Ask Don't Tell." I often wonder if I'm justified in
disidentifying with certain subsets of my communities like this, particularly
when acting as an ambassador. Do I have a responsibility to represent
perspectives I disagree with? Is dissociating myself from parts of my
communities destroying the cohesiveness of the communities as a whole?

I think there are certain inherent dangers in distancing yourself from certain
subsets of your communities, one of which is succumbing to respectability
politics as a mechanism for gaining social acceptance. A great example of this
is the relationship between the trans community and the otherkin community.
Many trans people—non-binary people in particular—really dislike the otherkin
community and make a concerted effort to ensure cis people don't associate the
two. Otherkin folks draw a lot of ire from the trans community for eroding the
credibility of the trans rights movement; what trans person hasn't been called
an attack helicopter by some transphobic asshole? We've worked hard for decades
to be taken seriously and have our gender identities respected, and in the
minds of many trans people, the otherkin community is undoing all that hard
work. The problem with this attitude is that it's an example of respectability
politics—the idea that the only way to gain social acceptance is to prove that
we're not so different from the rest of society. This means conforming to
patriarchal norms to make ourselves palatable to cis people, which isn't the
right way of going about gaining rights.

[I've talked in the
past](https://nothingradical.blog/2021/05/11/white-lies-and-approximate-definitions/)
about how I often have to misrepresent my identity or my communities to make
coming out to people easier, and I think this concept applies not just to the
definitions I give or the labels I use when explaining my identity, but also to
how I represent the attitudes and perspectives held by the communities I'm a
part of. When my personal perspectives differ from the prevailing attitudes of
my communities, I'm sometimes stuck between accurately representing myself and
accurately representing my community. For example, the conceptualization
schemes that are most commonly used in the aspec communities I'm originally
from and in aspec educational material aren't the conceptualization schemes
that I personally find most useful. Most aro people in my communities explain
their identity in terms of differentiating between romantic and platonic
attraction, but this dichotomy—and even the nebulous concept of "attraction" as
a whole—isn't how I understand my identity. So when I'm tasked with explaining
my orientation to people outside the community, I have to decide whether to
explain my identity in the way I personally understand it or to use the
language they are more likely to see when interacting with other aspec people.
As I explained in [another
essay](https://nothingradical.blog/2021/05/08/the-layer-cake-of-my-identity/),
I typically just avoid this problem by labeling myself as "asexual" and leaving
it at that. This is a great example of how deciding who is included in my "we"
can be complicated when I'm acting as an ambassador to one of my communities.

I don't believe that I—or any member of a minority group—have a responsibility
to educate people about my communities; people have a responsibility to be
respectful towards others, even towards groups they don't understand. However,
when I do choose to educate someone about one of my communities, I do feel like
I have a responsibility to represent my community fairly, because that person
may assume that I speak for all people in my community, and I may be their only
exposure to it. This isn't a responsibility to the person I'm educating, but a
responsibility to my community. But who exactly is included in "my community"
and whose opinions and perspectives I choose to represent can be complicated.
When my perspectives differ from those of other members of my communities—which
can range from understanding my identity in a slightly different way to
actively dissociating with those whose opinions I find harmful—how far this
responsibility extends isn't always clear. Maybe I have no responsibility to
represent anyone but myself; after all, all of our experiences are unique.

Let me know what you feel your responsibility is to your community when it
comes to representing dissenting opinions.
